======================
Augur v6 Release Notes
======================

Augur v6 was released on 2019-12-10. This release contains a number of
changes from Augur v5, including feature additions and bugfixes. The
biggest change is related to how Augur *exports* files for
visualisation by `Auspice
<https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/auspice/en/latest/>`__. We've
written :doc:`an extensive guide <migrating-v5-v6>` explaining our
motivations here, what has changed, how to upgrade, and how this
interfaces with Auspice.

----

.. contents::
   :local:
   :depth: 1

----

Export JSONs for specific versions of Auspice
---------------------------------------------

Probably the biggest (breaking) change you'll encounter is that
``augur export`` no longer works! See the :doc:`migration guide
<./migrating-v5-v6>` for a detailed explanation of this.

.. warning:: **Breaking change:** ``augur export`` no longer works,
             and now requires a further positional argument to define
             which version of Auspice you wish to target. ``augur
             export v1`` should behave the same as previous versions'
             ``augur export``.

Reference sequence output
-------------------------

The export command now accepts a flag to export the reference/root
sequence relative to which mutations are called, see :ref:`here
<different-outputs>` for more detail.

Change in ``augur ancestral``'s arguments
-----------------------------------------

``augur ancestral``, which reconstructs mutations across a tree, now
supports two forms of output and the arguments have become more
descriptive.

1. JSON output, including mutations for each branch and (inferred)
   ancestral sequences. This is specified by the
   ``--output-node-data`` argument.

2. FASTA output of reconstructed ancestral sequences. This had
   previously been available for VCF-inputs, but now works for any
   input. Users can ask for this output and specify a file name using
   ``--output-sequences``.

.. warning:: **Deprecation warning:** The argument ``--output`` is now
             deprecated. Please use ``--output-node-data`` instead.

Import BEAST MCC trees
----------------------

We now have instructions and functionality to import BEAST trees, see
`here <https://docs.nextstrain.org/en/latest/guides/bioinformatics/import-beast.html>`__.

Prettifying of strings
----------------------

Previous auspice version "prettified" metadata strings (like changing
'north_america' to 'North America'). Auspice v2 no longer does this,
see :ref:`here <prettifying-metadata-fields>` for more detail. The
``parse`` command now accepts and argument to apply string prettifying
operations to metadata parsed from fasta headers.

Whitespace in colors and lat-longs TSVs
---------------------------------------

To allow whitespace in metadata, files specifying colors and
geographic locations now need to be TAB delimited.

Move to GFF-style annotations
-----------------------------

Starting with Augur v6 we now use GFF coordinates: [one-origin,
inclusive] as opposed to BED coordinates. Strands are represented by
``+`` or ``-`` rather than ``1`` or ``0``. Additionally, we export the
``seqid``, but don't use it in Auspice.

Improvements and usage of JSON validation
-----------------------------------------

The export command will now validate the produced JSON against the
schema.

Removal of non-modular Augur and old builds
-------------------------------------------

Augur has been a dynamic, shapeshifting beast. It started as scripts
for Nextflu, took on more and more pathogens, was refactored into
"prepare" and "process" steps, and refactored again into the "modular"
Augur we now have. Earlier incarnations of Augur have now been removed
from the GitHub repo (``./base/*``).

Paralleling the different incarnations of Augur was a move to "builds"
being their own self-contained repos. We think this has been
remarkably successful, and de-couples the bioinformatics tooling from
a pathogen build. With this release of Augur we've now removed these
builds from the Augur GitHub repo, and the only builds that remain are
the test ones.

Test builds
-----------

There have been a number of test builds in the Augur repo and we have
leaned heavily on them while we developed this version of Augur as
well as Auspice v2. They are all self contained within
``./tests/builds`` and can all be run and examined in Auspice via

.. code-block:: bash

   cd tests/builds
   bash runner.sh # creates output in ./auspice
   auspice view --datasetDir auspice

(See the `Auspice docs
<https://docs.nextstrain.org/projects/auspice/en/latest/>`__ for
Auspice-specific questions.)

Documentation improvements
--------------------------

Documentation has always been a bit hit-or-miss with Nextstrain
projects. We've tried to make Augur's read-the-docs documentation more
comprehensive, with better flow. This entails new sections, with each
Augur command having its own page. We've tried to use redirects to
ensure that all the old links continue to work.

Miscellaneous
-------------

* ``augur filter``: More interpretable output of how many sequences
  each stage has filtered out.
* ``augur filter``: Additional flag ``--subsample-seed`` to seed the
  random number generator and thereby make subsampling reproducible.
* ``augur sequence-traits``: Numerical output as originally intended,
  but required an Auspice bugfix.
* ``augur traits``: Explanation of what is considered missing data &
  how it is interpreted.
* ``augur traits``: GTR models are exported in the output JSON for
  better accountability & reproducibility.
* Errors in formatting of input files (e.g. metadata files, Auspice
  config files) weren't handled nicely, often resulting in
  hard-to-interpret stack traces. We now try to catch these and print
  an error indicating the offending file.
* Tests using Python version 2 have now been removed.
